---
title: The Birth Of Tragedy
creator: Friedrich Nietzsche
categories: [Philosophy]
description: Nietzsche's The Birth of Tragedy contains many insights relevant to the way we think about art, life, & culture.
keywords: Nietzsche, philosophy, art, culture
layout: post
---

Today, I want to discuss *The Birth of Tragedy*, by Friedrich Nietzsche. This book, the full title of which is *Die Geburt der Tragödie aus dem Geiste der Musik (The Birth of Tragedy Out of the Spirit of Music)* was Nietzsche’s first, published in 1872. It deals with the development of the tragic artform in Ancient Greece, as well as its cultural consequences & broader aesthetic significance. The book gets very dense, especially for someone (like myself) who has no formal training in philosophy. That said, if you can bear with me, I’m going to get into a select few of the topics Nietzsche covers, doing my best to represent his positions accurately. My goal is to show that *The Birth of Tragedy* contains many insights relevant to the way we think about art, life, & culture.

A central concept in understanding Nietzsche’s analysis of the tragic is the distinction between what he terms the Apollonian & the Dionysian. He writes, 

> *“With those two gods of art, Apollo & Dionysus, we link our recognition that in the Greek world there exists a huge contrast, in origins & purposes, between visual (plastic) arts, the Apollonian, & the non−visual art of music, the Dionysian.” (§1)* 

The Apollonian, for Nietzsche, is closely tied to the individual, to the beauty of appearance, & to light. The Dionysian, on the other hand, is associated with intoxication, with the union of man & nature, & the forgetting of the self. Where the Apollonian is beautiful, well-ordered, & moderate, the Dionysian is exuberant, overflowing with vigour & orgiastic sensuality.

Among the Ancient Greeks, Apollonian art took many forms, including architecture & sculpture. Nietzsche also draws a line of connection between the Greek god of light & poetry, particularly the epic & lyric styles. The classification of these types of art as Apollonian is justified by their tendency to present & develop the beauty of an image or an aesthetic vision. Doric architecture, which Nietzsche describes as *“a defiantly aloof art” (§4)*, develops this beauty of image through well-defined geometry & symmetrical order. In the epic poetry of the Greeks, which reached its apex in Homer, a similar deification of appearances is achieved through repeating rhythmic patterns & the language of image. Following the philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer, Nietzsche makes the case that each of these forms, each of these means for the presentation of beauty & order, is a manifestation of the *“principium individuationis [the principle of individuality]” (§1)* & that Apollo represents *“the marvelous divine image” (§1)* of this principle. He argues further that the *principium individuationis*, as developed in Greek art & culture, becomes a stern ideal:

> *”Apollo, as the ethical divinity, demands moderation from his followers & self−knowledge, so that they can observe moderation. & so alongside the aesthetic necessity of beauty run the demands ‘Know thyself’ & ‘Nothing in excess.’” (§4)*

This principle is essential in art because it demands the development of the individual; it requires that all that is beautiful, wise, & sanguine in the individual be carefully sculpted into its purest form. 

But even as this work nears perfection, it must awaken a consciousness of pain. As we know all too well, our lives, no matter how great & well-ordered they could become, are only miniscule blips against eternity. In the final analysis, there is no beauty which will last forever. Even the once-strong & carefully constructed columns of the Doric order are now largely in ruins. The great paintings of the Renaissance, despite all efforts at restoration, must one day fade from glory, or else be disfigured by continual revision. With every step ascended in the direction of Apollonian beauty, the height of the fall grows larger; the more beautiful a thing becomes, the more is lost by its decay. Thus, we see that the development & appreciation of beauty which is exemplified by Apollo leads inevitably to suffering. In fact, individuation & personal desire are the deep sources of *all* our suffering. Art which presents only the beauty of appearances is incapable of protecting us from our fate. For that, we must have a complement to the Apollonian, we must have Nature herself, the Dionysian in art.

Nietzsche explains the role of the Dionysian as follows:

> *”Dionysian art [...] wants to convince us of the eternal delight in existence. But we must seek this delight, not in appearances, but behind them. We must recognize how everything which comes into being must be ready for a painful destruction.” (§17)*

As the quintessential Dionysian artform, Nietzsche points to music. As opposed to the Apollonian arts, music possesses *“emotionally disturbing tonal power, a unified stream of melody, & [a] totally incomparable world of harmony” (§2)*. With these characteristics, music is able to transform even the darkest of sentiments into gripping aesthetic experiences. Consider “sad songs” or heavy metal, or even the enduring popularity of Beethoven’s ominous 5th Symphony. Music, like no other artform, is able to pass through the thin surface of appearances & confront the suffering inherent in our mortality. Great music moves us with more force than any thought or word, no matter how eloquent. In contrast with Apollonian art, there is nothing which can be said about meaning or symbolism in music which is more than an approximation, a kind of metaphor for the music itself. We might discuss examples of melody or harmony being *associated* with certain emotions, but we can never clearly say *why*. No amount of studying chords & scales will reveal to you the “real reason” that diminishing C Major to C Major 7 gives an immediate feeling of melancholy. & yet, it does. According to Nietzsche, this mysterious power arises from the fact that music *“presents in symbolic form a sphere which is above all appearances & prior to them” (§17)* Music is deeper than language, independent of thought, & more fundamentally *real* than even the self. Hence, its association with the Dionysian, with the original unity of being & nature.

The Apollonian/Dionysian distinction is very useful in discerning the aesthetic & psychological forces at work in different forms of art. But for Nietzsche, it is not enough simply to classify one form as Apollonian, another as Dionysian. In *The Birth of Tragedy*, he undertakes to expose the very nature & origin of art. With the aim of doing so, he echoes a pattern of thought found in philosophical & religious texts across centuries, & one which the neuroscience of perception has tended to confirm. Namely, he notes that reality as we perceive it is an illusion. In the language of modern science, our every perception is constructed by the brain from a subset of the stimuli it receives. What we “see” when we look out at the world is not reality, but a reflection of our minds; we see a filtered & distorted, albeit an evolutionarily useful, mirage. Nietzsche extends this maxim of illusory reality into the realm of aesthetics, asserting that all works of art (& the dreams which so often generate them) are *“illusions of illusions” (§4)*. This seems to be correct, for if reality is an illusion, the fictions we create must be illusions within it, but it begs the question: why this extra layer? Why have human cultures been so inexorably driven - even in times of war, famine, & epidemic disease -  to create these “illusions of illusions?” Nietzsche argues that art is necessary as an expression of the “redemptive vision,” an antidote to the suffering & inevitable death which is the common lot of all human beings. It is in art, specifically Greek tragedy, that the development of this vision reaches its highest point & the dream world of Apollo may be reconciled with the intoxication of Dionysus. Nietzsche states, 

> *“[Apollo] shows us, with his awe−inspiring gestures, how the entire world of torment is necessary, so that through it the individual is pushed to create the redemptive vision & then, absorbed in contemplation of that vision, sits quietly in his rowboat, tossing around in the middle of the ocean.” (§4)*

The “ocean” Nietzsche refers to is elsewhere described as *“the ever-suffering & entirely contradictory primordial oneness” (§4)*. It is the vast & ever-changing reality upon whose surface we float, the thing encountered at the borders of the illusory self. This ocean is the substrate of existence, the origin of the Dionysian spirit. Its terrible expanse drives us to create a new ideal, an Apollonian vision of transcendence which redeems the very suffering which created it. But as we have seen, this vision is an illusion through-&-through. Thus, we concur with Nietzsche that art & dreams present the redemption of nature through illusion. Nietzsche sums this up nicely (poetically, even) in the following words:

> *“We should really look upon ourselves as beautiful pictures & artistic projections of the true creator, & in that significance as works of art we have our highest value, for only as aesthetic phenomena are existence & the world eternally justified…” (§5)*

This conception of life as an adventure in aesthetics ties in nicely with Aldous Huxley’s notion that the purpose of life is akin to a “refining of consciousness.” I discuss that idea in my analysis of [Brave New World][1]. What we see, in the light of these thoughts, is that the creation of art, & the reconciliation of its eternally warring elements, perhaps constitutes the ultimate goal of consciousness. By art, I mean not only paintings, music, films, &c., but most importantly, our own lives. To treat our lives as stories to be told, as sculptures to be chiseled out of the hard marble of circumstance, is to give an undying purpose to our struggles, & to fashion ourselves as representatives of the redemptive vision Nietzsche discusses. This idea is daunting, but it is also inspiring, because it requires not only that we step beyond what is easy & common into the Apollonian realm of beauty, but that we go still further by embracing the Dionysian, by accepting our fate of death & dissolution. One who incorporates the natures of these rival deities elevates oneself & attains the glory of the tragic heroes who emerged from the music & myths of the Greeks.

To be clear, I do not suggest that we may simply read Greek tragedy, act like an Oedipus, & become works of art. Ancient Greek tragedy is just that: ancient & Greek; it does not belong to the modern world. The artform may endure because of its appeal to the universal principles of human psychology, but there is an element of its power which is diminished & diluted by the distance between our culture & that of the ancients. This distance is nowhere more apparent (or more important) than in the contrast between the lack of living myths in our culture & their great plurality among the Greeks. Today, we can scarcely understand the position of significance which myth once occupied, nor what great powers of orientation we have lost by its abandonment. As Nietzsche writes:

> *“The images of myth must be the unseen, omnipresent demonic sentries under whose care
the young soul matures & by whose signs a man interprets his life & struggles for himself.” (§23)*

Myth, in its historical function, acted as a framework by which fickle, unpredictable Fortune could be comprehended. It was a structure in which one could embed oneself, something like a boat upon the ocean we talked about. Nietzsche points out that myth & art also serve as a bulwark against a universal pessimism which would otherwise paralyze us:

> *”the acknowledgement of the tragic, [...] in order merely to be endured, requires art as a protector & healer.” (§15)*

In the past, myth & religion gave one the extraordinary ability to identify with a shared narrative & to find meaning in even the hardest trials of life. Today, in contrast, one hears everywhere a crying out, a plea for a purpose of any kind. In the face of this “crisis of meaning”, as it’s been called, many have argued for a return to the belief systems of the past, namely religious ones. Such a return might act as an anchor for a culture set adrift, but of course, it would not come without a cost & a serious danger: history is replete with atrocities committed in the name of religion. Further, Nietzsche points out several times in *The Birth of Tragedy* that the chances are very low that *“transplanting a foreign myth would enjoy any lasting success, without irreparably damaging the tree in the transplant” (§23).* For these reasons & others, I do not lament the declining power of old myths & superstitions, nor believe they should be restored in some ill-conceived attempt to lift the weight of nihilism from our shoulders. Yet it is important to understand our present condition. How is it that we have arrived in a world where the absence of meaning is so widely acknowledged? How did the myths which once organized the aims & the art of entire cultures go so quietly to their graves? It’s fitting that we should investigate these questions with reference to Nietzsche; after all, he’s perhaps best known for his proclamation, *“God is dead,”* first printed in his book, *The Gay Science (1882)*. In *The Birth of Tragedy*, Nietzsche explains the process by which even the most deeply-rooted myths meet their ends:

> *” … people begin anxiously to defend the credibility of their myths, but to resist the naturally continuing life & growth of those myths, & when the feeling for the myth dies out [...] the claim to put religion on a historical footing steps onto the scene.” (§10)*

We know this story all too well. We have seen it played out by Biblical literalists, strict constructionists, & even comic book zealots. The once living & breathing narratives of the past suffer death by a million fact checks, their historical circumstances examined under a microscope by careful, uncompromising eyes. No longer permitted to grow & evolve, they linger on as mere shadows of their former selves. When people speak of these stories, it is often with mechanical certainty; their events are not re-lived, but recited like nursery rhymes. Take Star Wars fanatics, for example. They might be able to tell you the names of the planets & creatures of the films, or describe to you the major battles of the Clone Wars, but all of this information would tell you nothing about why the story held such interest in the first place. To only talk about the fine-grained details of George Lucas’ fictional universe is to miss completely the power of the story. Star Wars might *be* full of exotic planets & strange creatures, but it is more importantly a story in which the hero triumphs over the forces of the Empire. Incidentally, this is just how new installments (if we really must have more) should be assessed: not according to whether they check all the boxes in some character’s back story, but whether they resurrect the story to a new life.

Speaking of resurrections, we might consider Christianity in the same light. We would see that American fundamentalists, by their insistence on the literal truth of the Bible, have robbed it of its symbolic power. The claim that the events of the Bible *actually happened* as they are written has invited them into the realm of history, where they may be analyzed with the same skepticism as tales of Bigfoot & UFOs. What the fundamentalists have missed in their delusion is that the hero (whether Christ or any other) is not important as a historical figure, but as a symbol of the will. Considered as an ideal toward which to strive, the story of Christ’s suffering & death gains ultimate value. Taken as a “real” human being, however, Christ can hardly be understood.

Star Wars & the Bible are not the only victims of this historicizing impulse we might unearth; there is a countless number in similar graves. Today in the Western world, myth persists only in small pockets among a limited number of people. As I said before, this is not exactly a *bad* thing, but it does a lot to scatter the force of a people, to drive out the spirit of unity, & to leave them searching for meaning in any avenue open to them. Nietzsche saw this pattern in his own age:

> *”Let's imagine a culture which has no fixed & sacred primordial seat but which is condemned to exhaust all possibilities & to live on a meagre diet from all other cultures—& there we have the present...” (§23)*

Further, he was able to see that a society which lacks a shared myth will also lack the means to balance its opposing Apollonian & Dionysian elements. This couldn’t be more true of our own culture; Apollo, as the representative of the individualizing principle, rules unchecked over Dionysus, most apparently in our politics. We hear so often the rhetoric of nationalism, which Nietzsche connects directly with individualism, saying *“a sense of state & homeland cannot survive without an affirmation of the individual personality” (§21)*. More generally, it seems that cultures in which politics is the only universal topic of conversation will inevitably become politicized. As Nietzsche phrases it:

> *” In cases where the political drives are considered unconditionally valid, it's [...] necessary for a people to turn to the path of the most extreme forms of secularization.” (§21)*

We now have a new way of looking at some of the problems on our own political landscape, particularly the polarization so often complained of in the news. It is true that confirmation bias & the “echo chamber” effects of the Internet & new media have exacerbated the problem, but I believe the root of it lies in the lack of a shared medium through which we can attempt to make sense of the world around us. Nor will this problem be solved by any amount of political argumentation; so much of one’s politics is determined by one’s personality & experience. No matter how clear & logical a policy may seem to you, there will always be someone to say “nuh-uh.” To really overcome internal differences & move forward, a people must have some unifying narrative about their identity & their destiny. But neither identity nor destiny really exist in the world of facts. It thus falls to art to provide this narrative structure. Though some might say I’m making too much of art, I strongly agree with Nietzsche that there is a deep connection between the things we create & the lives that we live. We often think of culture as a set of shared beliefs, or as the way in which people interact, but I think it is more deeply a story, one which we are acting out across generations in time. Art is what creates that story. Writers, musicians, & painters push the boundaries of their artforms & begin new chapters in our shared history. Their work does not look backwards at what was, it does not look around at what is. Rather, it looks forward & imagines what could be. It’s often said that art imitates life, but I believe just the opposite: life imitates art.

*The Birth of Tragedy* deals with a number of other topics, like the conflicts between a theoretical or scientific view of the world (which Nietzsche traces to Socrates), & an aesthetic one, which we’ve been discussing. I won’t go into that now, but the book is very short (68 pages, in the [PDF version][2] I read), & it’s highly worth the read. If you liked this discussion of Nietzsche, please connect with me through whichever platform you’ve found it on, or visit my website, [Perceptua.blue][3], to see more of what I’m working on. If you know anyone else who might be interested in these topics, please share this with them. Most importantly, thanks for taking the time.
	
[1]: https://perceptua.blue/literature/brave-new-world
[2]: http://www.russoeconomics.altervista.org/Nietzsche.pdf
[3]: https://perceptua.blue/
