---
title: Brave New World
keywords: 'literature, novella, dystopian'
categories: [Literature]
layout: post
---

### Video
<iframe 
  width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zA6XtvJ4TGU" frameborder="0" 
  allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen>
</iframe>

### Audio
<audio controls>
  <source src="https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/perceptua-b6ea3.appspot.com/o/public%2FBrave%20New%20World.mp3 alt=media&token=1823db64-fa19-4233-9c0a-55b4e234ffc1" type="audio/mpeg">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>

### Text

  *Brave New World* is Aldous Huxley’s famous & extremely prescient story of a dystopian future in which every aspect of life is controlled by an all-powerful state. It’s essential reading for informed thinkers, & it’s less than 200 pages, so go & read it if you haven’t already. I won’t waste much time describing the plot.
  
<iframe
  style="width:120px;height:240px;" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no" frameborder="0"
  src="//ws-na.amazon-adsystem.com/widgets/q?ServiceVersion=20070822&OneJS=1&Operation=GetAdHtml&MarketPlace=US&source=ac&ref=tf_til&ad_type=product_link&tracking_id=perceptua02-20&marketplace=amazon&region=US&placement=0060776099&asins=0060776099&linkId=08fd3c1084859f33d0862c649af734a2&show_border=true&link_opens_in_new_window=false&price_color=4bee8f&title_color=f2f2f2&bg_color=676087">
</iframe>

  The true genius of the book, what really sets Huxley apart, is an intuition for the psychology of social control. As opposed to the rulers of some other fictional dystopias, the agents of Huxley’s World State do not maintain control through violence and outright oppression. Instead, they begin to mold obedient citizens from a very young age - before they are even conceived, in fact. Children are pre-sorted into social classes, forbidden to have any private thoughts or close personal relationships, and essentially hypnotized into conformity. The government provides plenty of vacuous entertainment to occupy all of their spare time. Bright lights, pleasant smells, and sensuous experiences are designed to keep everyone complacent, & all with one aim in mind - stability. It is through stability that the state maintains its grip on its citizens.

  Huxley realizes that terror is not conducive to stability, & accordingly his *Brave New World* is controlled not by fear, but by dopamine. Hedonism & the love of the material world are not suppressed, but actively encouraged. Huxley sees insightfully that this method, as opposed to rule by heavy-handed force, is far more conducive to the highest aim of authoritarian regimes, namely uneventful, unending, uninterrupted control. What do those in charge have to fear when all are lulled by ease & pleasure into complacency, or better yet - love of their own servitude? In his 1946 or ‘47 foreword to *Brave New World*, Huxley writes that, for this “love of servitude,” at least four things are needed: an “improved technique of suggestion,” a “developed science of human differences,” a “substitute for alcohol & other narcotics,” & “a foolproof system of eugenics.”

  As an “improved technique of suggestion,” the book suggests hypnopaedia, a method of indoctrinating young children while they sleep. They are instructed by way of pre-recorded propaganda to place the community above all else. They should consider themselves & their very thoughts to be the common property of everyone, & they should keep nothing from their peers. As things stand, we’ve not gone as far as Huxley’s novella in this regard, but there are some unsettling parallels to be observed. With the advertiser-driven models of social media & other websites, we are subject to the incessant & ever more intrusive noise of brands pushing their products & services. For now, we are still safe from subliminal messages in our sleep. But if our dreams are not interrupted by popup ads, or “you can skip this video in 5… 4…,” or some other annoyance, that is only because advertisers have not yet figured out how to do it. You can be sure it is not a deeply held respect for your privacy or sanity which has thus far kept them out. If we wish to stay clear of hypnopaedic Hell in the future, we would do well to keep it in mind, & to push back strongly against anything that looks remotely like it.

  In regards to another of Huxley’s requirements for a dystopian future, a “substitute for alcohol & other narcotics,” our forward-thinking & not-at-all shallow culture has some promising candidates. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram - we’re already addicted. In much the same way that people seek an escape from pain or social isolation through the use of drugs, they disappear into the vacuous world of social media, where they can broadcast a false version of their lives & soak up whatever twisted view of the world is best suited to their ideological - & sometimes pathological - cravings. Social media are often touted as a way to connect with “anyone, anywhere, anytime,” & they certainly have value as a means to facilitating deeper, in-person experiences. But it’s often more sensible to assess the purpose of a product by observing how it is used - & creating meaningful, lasting relationships is *not* how social media are typically used. Can you recall a time when you closed Twitter with a smile, feeling deeply enriched by the bits of 280-character wisdom you just imbibed? Or is Twitter, like the others, more often a mindless distraction? Or worse, are social media something you look to for validation, checking how many people liked your post, or who watched your latest story? I’ve certainly fallen prey to this dynamic. In *Brave New World*, many of the characters take soma, a drug that lets them “take a little vacation” & escape even the most mild discomfort without any risk of lasting harm. In many ways, the apps on our phones act similarly - there is no obvious Instagram hangover, no visible psychological or physical damage from habitual tweeting. & yet on some level, we all know the damage is being done.

  What’s more, I think social media render us ineffectual as people. Particularly, when we see or take part in social media activism, we might get the impression that something is being done, we might be broadcasting that we are part of the solution. Quite often, however, we are merely amplifying digital noise around problems that will only really be solved when we put down our phones & solve them. But ask yourself, who does it serve, if it serves anyone, for us to be escaping real problems (& by extension, their solutions) through social media? The danger, if we draw on Huxley’s line of thinking, is that it serves whoever seeks to control us. You can fill in that blank with whatever horrible monster you like.

  In addition to the current panoply of digital drugs, another technology looms worryingly on the horizon - VR (virtual reality). One can only imagine how the escapism we just examined through the lens of social media will intensify when VR becomes sufficiently “real” to be believable, & when its applications grow beyond their current scope. As to the other questions surrounding VR, like “How will it change our perception of what is real?” & “How will it alter aesthetic experiences like watching movies?” I really can’t say how impactful VR will be, but these are things worth thinking about. Given our track record with new technology & the bells of warning tolling out from the pages of *Brave New World*, I think we ought to remain wary that VR is not too easily hijacked by state or commercial interests & turned into a machine for the delivery of propaganda.

  The two remaining ingredients in Huxley’s recipe for a *Brave New World*, as outlined in his foreword, are a “developed science of human differences” & ”a foolproof system of eugenics.” In the book, children are not conceived or born naturally, but are manufactured in test tubes in facilities of the state. They are presorted by a scientific procedure into classes which determine their jobs & social positions. Obviously, we have not yet progressed to this level of technological creationism, but it is not inconceivable that things are moving in that direction. With genomic sequencing, *in vitro* fertilization & a number of other innovations, the possibility comes closer each day. What remains to be seen is whether this technology will be used properly for the reduction of risk to the child & its mother, or whether it will be commandeered for ill by those who wish to put a heavy finger on the scale of social organization. *Brave New World* warns us about the potential consequences of the latter. The citizens of the World State cede all control over their reproductive faculties to scientists & social engineers. Even more disturbing is the attitude the citizens adopt regarding parenthood. “Mother” & “father” become 4-letter words, & the very thought of our “primitive” form of reproduction is an offense to them, something backwards & repulsive. It seems clear, however, that the calculated manipulation of the social order for the sake of stability is far, far worse.

  Given that advances in biotechnology are likely to continue, it may be prudent to take preemptive action against any eugenic applications of new technologies. On today’s political landscape, there are many worrisome views which validate this concern. Considering rightwing identitarians, the obvious concern is a rigid hierarchy enforced by the technology & by institutions: a hierarchy organized with white men at the apex & all others relegated to an unjust subservience. Regarding leftwing authoritarians, who despise unequal distributions not just of wealth, but of competence, the fear is that the technology may be used to shave the diversity & richness of human talents down to a flat, grey, but equal blob.

  On that dark note, I should mention that *Brave New World* is more than just a warning against complacency in the face of totalitarianism. Huxley uses the all-encompassing power of his World State as a plot device, a sort of backdrop against which the most important themes of the story are explored. It is against this backdrop that the protagonist, John, struggles to find meaning. John was born largely by accident; his mother, Linda, was a citizen of the World State who got pregnant while on vacation near a Savage Reservation (Huxley’s politically incorrect name for a fenced reserve for the natives of Malpais). When she gave birth to John, Linda’s shame at being a mother prevented her from returning to the World State. She opted instead to remain on the reservation, & it was there that John was raised. Linda taught John to read from the two books which she had brought with her: one a scientific manual & the other, the works of Shakespeare. John was an outcast among his peers & looked down upon, but he found solace in the noble & poetic sentiments of the Bard & his characters. In many ways, Shakespeare served as John’s moral & aesthetic education. (Notably, the title of Huxley’s novella is derived from Miranda’s speech in Shakespeare’s play *The Tempest*, Act V, Scene I: “O brave new world, that has such people in’t.”). When a chance visit from one of the story’s other characters gives John a chance to leave the reservation & go to London, he can scarcely be more excited to see what this “brave new world” has to offer.

  John’s sojourn to the World City of London creates an intense juxtaposition between the shallow hedonism of the high-tech “utopia” & the dogmatic, superstitious culture in which he was raised. Initially excited by the prospect of a state organized by rational principles, he becomes quickly disillusioned. John is caught, in Huxley’s words, “between insanity on the one hand & lunacy on the other.” He wishes ardently to live a life aligned with the virtue & loftiness of his Shakespearian heroes, but finds no place where these values are expressed. Everywhere he goes, he is exposed to their opposites. John is revolted by the World State practice of “death conditioning,” which involves exposing children to the bodies of the recently deceased in hospitals with the aim of reducing the fear & significance they attach to death. What’s more, his love interest in the novella proves not to be the chaste & virtuous woman he dreams her to be. When she makes advances toward him with the free & casual sexual attitude her culture has imparted, John attacks her & retreats from society altogether. He returns to the religious penitence of the  culture in which he was raised, whipping himself for his sins & desires. I won’t reveal any more of the details of John’s story to those of you who have not yet read *Brave New World*, but it is a sorrowful one, to say the least.

  The tragedy of John’s life, as it unfolds in Huxley’s dystopian future, carries a powerful lesson. It shows, as Huxley has it, “that the purpose of life [is] not the maintenance of well-being, but some intensification & refining of consciousness, some enlargement of knowledge.” In a moving scene of dialogue near the end of the novella, John insists that, for the attainment of this purpose (which Huxley terms man’s Final End), conflict & suffering are *required*. The kind of meaningless, self-absorbed, & pleasurable experiences offered in the World State lead to empty, wasted lives. They may serve to create social order & stability - the bread & butter of totalitarians - but they are antithetical to man’sFinal End, to the pursuit of a fully-engaged, meaningful life. In closing, *Brave New World* leaves us a chart through the rough waters of authoritarianism & runaway “progress”, & offers us a shining beacon, calling us to seek a higher purpose in our lives.
