---
title: The Library of Babel
creator: Jorge Luis Borges
categories: [Literature]
description: Borges' "The Library of Babel" comments on the human condition & our search for meaning.
keywords: borges, library of babel, literature, essay
layout: post
---

### YouTube
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/oVIVk9eRIb4" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Audio
<audio controls>
  <source src="https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/perceptua-b6ea3.appspot.com/o/public%2FThe%20Library%20of%20Babel.wav?alt=media&token=9c78dbf9-8c6f-4a32-9fc2-3734bbf7164e">
</audio>

### Text
The following essay was originally written as part of an English course I took at the University at Buffalo. (If you’re hearing the audio version of the essay, citations for the sources I mention can be found on the essay’s webpage at perceptua.blue). It is an interpretive essay whose subject is Jorge Luis Borges’ short story, “La biblioteca de Babel,” or “The Library of Babel.”(For those interested in reading it, a [PDF version][1] can be found online.) The story is written from the perspective of a librarian who, like the others of his kind, has spent his whole life wandering a vast—perhaps infinite—library, perusing its volumes for some sign as to the reason for its existence, as well as his own. As I hope I’ve made clear in the essay, the story has much to say about the human condition, about the ultimate value of our pursuits.

Perhaps it’s so difficult to begin an essay like this one because there are unimaginably many possibilities for its composition—I must choose words from hundreds of thousands of options, order the chosen words into sentences, order the ordered sentences into paragraphs, etc. The number of decisions to be made is paralyzing. Nor is it clear, when a choice is made, whether it is right, wrong, or otherwise; an idea never announces when it has been captured by words (if doing so is even possible). And beyond writing, this complexity only multiplies. The overwhelming possibilities evoke dizzying thoughts of the Infinite—just the sort of thoughts confronted by the expiring librarian of Jorge Luis Borges’ “The Library of Babel.” Much like ourselves, that weary explorer of books and hexagons searches for meaning in what may amount to an endless labyrinth, unsure it can ever be found. As a mirror of our own world, Borges’ Library is a “figuration and promise” (Borges 112) of the impenetrable haze which shrouds our search for meaning. But if clear sight is impossible, the last address of Borges’ librarian still calls out from some distant place, hinting at a way through the fog.

Borges establishes the vastness of the Library by a relatively simple scheme: “…each bookshelf holds thirty-two books identical in format; each book contains four hundred ten pages; each page, forty lines; each line, approximately eighty black letters” (113). Based on this system of organization, the number of possible books can be calculated to be roughly 101,834,097 (Bloch 18). As William Goldbloom Bloch writes, “it would take 101,834,013 universes the size of ours to hold just the books of the Library” (19). Borges informs us that this is “a number which, though unimaginably vast, is not infinite” (115). Despite its finitude, the fraction of this sea of volumes traversable in a librarian’s lifetime is vanishingly small. And because the Library may be “total,” meaning “its bookshelves contain all possible combinations of the twenty-two orthographic symbols” (Borges 115), the probability of finding a book which contains any meaningful—much less, personally relevant—information is indistinguishable from zero. Yet by various (though equally futile) strategies, the denizens of Borges’ Library continue to search for such books. Some scour the shelves for their Vindications—“books of *apologiæ* and prophecies that would vindicate for all time the actions of every person in the universe” (Borges 115)—and others search for “a book that is the cipher and perfect compendium *of all other books*” (Borges 116). Are we not unlike these librarians? Do we not expect the world to show us signs, to give justifications for our struggles, to vindicate us? In spite of our wishes, the world, like the Library, remains mute. And ours is a  still harder problem than the librarians’, for we do not even know what form such signs could take.The librarians at least have their Vindications to seek, but even so, they are unsure which signs are real, which to trust. As Borges writes, the multitude of the Library’s volumes is believed to contain “the faithful catalog of the Library, thousands and thousands of false catalogs, the proof of the falsity of those false catalogs, a proof of the falsity of the *true* catalog…” (115). Further, even the language of these catalogs must be met with suspicion by the librarians; Borges explains that, because the symbols of a given book in the Library arise from combinatorial variation, there is no guarantee that they signify the things which the librarians’ language would suggest, or anything at all (118). In the Library, meaning is never grounded or secure; it is forever open to reinterpretation and nullification. This transfigures the “elegant appointments” of the Library into a twisting maze with no exit. Here, we glimpse a reflection of our own world in Borges’ writing, where, as Ricardo Gutiérrez-Mouat says, “there is no revelation but only the *imminence* of one” (288). Though at times it may seem that we have “found the path,” or that the guiding purpose of our endeavors will soon be revealed, a simple question serves to erase our tenuous certainty: how do I know? If we dive honestly into the epistemology behind any “fact”, we find there is little more than our desire for some event to be a “sign from the universe” to distinguish it from chance, the ever-buzzing static of a world in flux.

Given that the world is unwilling to speak in coherent sentences, let alone divulge the meaning of life, can we find any lasting sense of meaning at all? On this issue, Borges’ librarian seems to waver. After the discovery of the totality of the Library, the mood among the librarians is hopeful: “The universe was justified; the universe suddenly became congruent with the unlimited width & breadth of humankind’s hope” (Borges 115). But as we discussed, the dark shadow of this totality is the “unimaginably vast” number of books between any Librarian and his Vindication. The librarian records, “That unbridled hopefulness was succeeded, naturally enough, by a similarly disproportionate depression” (Borges 116). All the answers may be out there, but their incredible remoteness and their vulnerability to questions of interpretation make us wonder: why bother looking? The consolation that Borges seems to offer is that the difficulty of finding answers, and the need to interpret those answers for oneself, are precisely what makes life worth living. As “The Library of Babel” shows, an individual can view life as a series of wasted efforts in a labyrinth, or as a meaningful pursuit of beauty, a quest for order amidst the disorder of the world. Borges sketches these alternatives through the lives of the librarians. Some view their world as a “feverish Library, whose random volumes… affirm all things, deny all things, and confound and confuse all things” (117). But the librarian who narrates the story (though he concedes that humanity may be “the work of chance or of malevolent demiurges”), believes that “the universe, with its elegant appointments… can only be the handiwork of a god” (113). The librarian believes that there are patterns to be found in the vast structure of the Library, that “the same volumes are repeated in the same disorder—which, repeated, becomes order: the Order” (118). This attitude of reverence breathes a solemn beauty into the scale and magnificence of the Library; its shelves need not give answers to burning personal questions in order to be valued—its grandeur alone may be appreciated. And it is that appreciation which is key. Meaning is a necessarily personal experience, and it must be sought in one’s personal relationship to the world. If we wish life to reveal to us something so sublime as ultimate meaning, we must be able to appreciate life for all its apparent disorder and the suffering it causes us. Borges’ librarian upholds this sentiment even when the prospect of a final revelation is all but lost for him. Contemplating the possibility of glimpsing the “total book” in the face of his approaching demise, he writes:

>If the honor and wisdom and joy of such a reading are not to be my own, let them be for others. Let heaven exist, though my own place be in hell. Let me be tortured and battered and annihilated, but let there be one instant, one creature, wherein thy enormous Library may find its justification. (Borges 117)

Though life will soon end for the librarian, the hard labor of its pursuits will nonetheless prove worthwhile if the secrets of the Library are one day revealed.

“The Library of Babel” instructs us that, though we face great obstacles in trying to impart meaning to the complexity and constant change which surround us, there may yet be a way to do so. Though we may not find our way through the labyrinth ourselves, and though we may not experience personally the justification of our struggles, we can nonetheless find meaning through the appreciation of the extraordinary fact of existence. Considered in this light, we might reframe our endeavors as a willingness to play the grand game that life has set before us, an exploration of all its possibilities. Though our turn may expire and life be crowned the victor, we triumph by merely engaging with such an opponent. Through this spirit of appreciation for the challenges which confront us—through playfulness, if you like—we may grab hold of that meaning which, sought in the brute facts of the world, so easily slips away. As Borges’ librarian concludes, “My solitude is cheered by that elegant hope” (118).
Works Cited

Bloch, William Goldbloom. The Unimaginable Mathematics of Borges’ Library of Babel. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2008.

Borges, Jorge Luis. Collected Fictions. Translated by Andrew Hurley, Penguin Books, 1998.

Gutiérrez-Mouat, Ricardo. “Borges and the Center of the Labyrinth”. Romance Notes, Vol. 21, No. 3, 1981, pp. 287-292.

[1]: https://sites.evergreen.edu/politicalshakespeares/wp-content/uploads/sites/226/2015/12/Borges-The-Library-of-Babel.pdf





