---
title: The Book of Sand
categories: [Essay]
description: A discussion & analysis of the infinite horrors in Borges' Book of Sand
keywords: borges, book of sand, literature, symbolism, fantasy, infinity
layout: post
---

<!--
### YouTube
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/N7gvXAZMp6A" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Audio
<audio controls>
  <source src="https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/perceptua-b6ea3.appspot.com/o/public%2FThe%20Birth%20of%20Tragedy.wav?alt=media&token=3fd1a2a9-bbb6-4c9d-aa8f-15525f9af9a8">
</audio>
-->

Jorge Luis Borges' 1975 short story "The Book of Sand" describes an encounter with an infinite book. Perusing its endless pages, the story's narrator experiences curiosity, obsession, & finally horror. Borges' expert storycraft is a source of wit & wisdom for the attentive reader, as well as a source of mathematical & philosophical questions. On the story itself, I have written an interpretive essay entitled "Infinite Horrors" (to be found below in text<!--& audio-->, or <a target="_blank" href="https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/perceptua-b6ea3.appspot.com/o/public%2FInfinite%20Horrors.pdf?alt=media&token=84fb8ad2-58d6-43ac-9be6-efbb07f3e3f5">here in PDF</a>); its mathematical elements I have addressed in an analysis called <a target="_blank" href="https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/perceptua-b6ea3.appspot.com/o/public%2FPage%20of%20No%20Return.pdf?alt=media&token=2daac485-6156-4caf-8898-31b543df675f">"Page of No Return"</a>. It is my hope that these documents will be of some use to you, dear reader. It is not impossible that you will one day find yourself in possession of an infinite book—you should know what to do with it.

### Text

Infinity—or its grander title, <i>the infinite</i>—is often employed in literature to evoke transcendent awe, wonder beyond comprehension. A glimpse of the infinite makes small the body, & yet expands the soul. But what becomes of one who looks longer into the endless? In the eponymous story of Borges’ 1975 collection, *The Book of Sand*,<sup id="one-origin"><a href="#one">1</a></sup> the narrator acquires the means of answering this question. Searching the pages of an “impossible book,”<sup id="two-origin"><a href="#two">2</a></sup> he finds what all mortals must find in a prolonged encounter with the infinite: a bottomless abyss. Through a narrator whose past mirrors his own, Borges shows us that for all whose days are numbered, the infinite is a Hydra against which no wound can be inflicted, no victory attained. This revelation also brings to light the myriad ironies of “The Book of Sand.” Looking backward in time, the reader can see that details which may have appeared incidental or irrelevant were in fact calling out to the future, foreshadowing the inevitable. Yet we need not succumb to fate or the unending horrors of an infinite book—Borges’ narrator, by his rejection of the infinite & his embrace of the finite, points the way out of the labyrinth.

The Book of Sand is a book of unassuming appearance, described in the collection’s afterword as an “unlucky & inconceivable” object. It makes its way into the narrator’s hands through a stranger, a seller of Bibles who knocks one night at the door. Of course this *evening knock at the door* is a motif well-established, recalling the fantastic tales of Poe & others—it should put us immediately on our guard. Opening the door & allowing the stranger inside, the narrator is faced with a “tall man, with blurred, vague features.” To this description the narrator appends the comment, “or perhaps my nearsightedness made me see him that way.” Though the stranger’s physique may have been vaguely imposing, the narrator seems not to discover any threat in his appearance. He tells us that “He gave off an air of melancholy,” & that “Everything about him spoke of honest poverty.” In contrast to the stranger’s modest mien, the narrator is rather well-off. Set against his guest’s simplicity of countenance & speech, his remarks paint a picture of a more refined, if decidedly colder individual. On learning that the stranger sells Bibles, he replies with what he himself describes as “a somewhat stiff, pedantic note,” listing the many versions of Scripture he already possesses & adding “As you see, it isn’t exactly Bibles I might be needing.”

It is on this point that the stranger introduces him to another “sacred book,” purchased from an Untouchable in northern India for “a few rupees & a Bible.” The narrator examines the clothbound tome, noting the strange numbering of its pages & a drawing which adorns one of them, an anchor sketched in pen-&-ink. The stranger advises him, “Look at it well. You will never see it again.” To the narrator, this comment is the first indication that his visitor is not what he seems; he tells the reader, “There was a threat in the words, but not in the voice.” His uneasiness increases when his guest prompts him to seek the first page of the book, & then the last—he fails in both places. “This can’t be,” he proclaims. Discomfited & irritated by the stranger & his wares, he steers the conversation away from the book. His digression allows us another glimpse of both characters—something of the stranger’s homeland, the narrator’s worldliness, & their respective tastes in literature. The narrator relates:

> It was then that I learned he was a Scot, & that his home was in the Orkneys. I told him I had a great personal fondness for Scotland because of my love for Stevenson & Hume.<br><br>
“And Robbie Burns,” he corrected.

Given Borges’ economy of language (“The Book of Sand” is scarcely four pages in my copy of the *Collected Fictions*), we ought to be skeptical that these references to Scottish letters are arbitrary. In the foreword to his 1941 collection *The Garden of Forking Paths*, Borges writes of the fictitious Pierre Menard, “The catalog of writings I have ascribed to him is not terribly amusing, but it is not arbitrary, either; it is a diagram of his mental history…” It may be that a similar principle is at work behind the references made in “The Book of Sand.” A bit of investigation sustains this conjecture: each of the characters are illuminated by the references they make.

The stranger’s mention of Robbie Burns (or “Rabbie,” as a Scot may call him) is perhaps the most straightforward of the references. Known as the National Bard or the Ploughman Poet, Robert Burns is widely regarded as the people’s poet of Scotland. Many of his poems center on social & cultural themes, some extolling the virtues of Scotch whiskey & folk songs. The stranger’s elevation of Burns above the writers named by the narrator (one of them a novelist, the other a philosopher), suggests he is a man who is sensitive to the poetry of his people, & who harbors a genuine love for his native land.

The narrator’s references contain less of these poetic sentiments, & touch on cooler, more intellectual subjects. “Stevenson” is, of course, the Scottish writer Robert Louis Stevenson, best known for his novels <ins>Kidnapped</ins>, <ins>Treasure Island</ins>, & <ins>Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll & Mr. Hyde</ins>. Borges mentions Stevenson in the afterword to *The Book of Sand*, noting that the Scot was often inspired by “the old theme of the double.” This comment is in reference to another story in the collection, but it should nonetheless alert us that there may be certain doubles or Doppelgängers hidden in “The Book of Sand” as well… The narrator’s second reference, to Scottish philosopher David Hume, is in good keeping with his earlier characterization. Hume is well known for—among other things—his formulation of the problem of induction, which states, roughly, that it is impossible to reason from a finite collection of observations to a universal truth. The narrator’s affinity for Hume suggests he may take a skeptical approach to matters of the infinite—thus his uneasiness about the Book of Sand, & his initial resistance to the notion that it is “literally infinite,” should come as no surprise.

When the conversation inevitably returns to the Book of Sand, it is time to make a deal; the stranger offers the book to the narrator & names his price. The figure is too high for the narrator to pay, but he soon has a counter-offer: “I will offer you the full sum of my pension, which I have just received, & Wyclif’s black-letter Bible.” This the stranger accepts, examining the Bible with some excitement, but not bothering to count the money. The narrator remarks, “I was astonished that he did not haggle.” Taking the narrator’s pension & Bible, the stranger makes an exit which once more recalls the conventions of fantasy & mystery: “Night was falling when the man left. I have never seen him since, nor do I know his name.” We should not suppose that this use of convention is accidental or unconscious: in the foreword to his *Complete Poetry*, Borges writes, “Literature imposes its magic through artifices; the reader ends by recognizing & disdaining them; hence the constant necessity of minimal or maximal variations, which may recover a past or prefigure a future.”<sup id="three-origin"><a href="#three">3</a></sup> The minimal variation between the Bible-seller’s exit & the canonical “stranger vanishing into the night” should thus arouse our suspicions. Indeed, it does prefigure for the narrator a troubled & sleepless future.

Now that the narrator has acquired the Book of Sand, the infinite horrors are truly to begin. The narrator pores over its pages, searching for repeated patterns in the illustrations but finding none. His zeal for the book aggravates his “already habitual misanthropy,” causing him to retreat into a sleepless, hermitic obsession. He becomes, in his own words, “a prisoner of the book.” But we must not forget that this prison is of the narrator’s own design; the bars of his cell are wrought not by the book itself, but by his own relentless searching for patterns. His self-imprisonment in the Book of Sand elucidates an interesting connection between the story & its epigraph, “…thy rope of sands…,” which comes from a poem by George Herbert entitled “The Collar.” We may see an obvious link between the rope of sands & the book of the same name if we imagine, to paraphrase the Indian man quoted by the stranger, that neither Herbert’s rope nor the Book of Sand has a beginning or an end. But a deeper connection may be found in the meaning of Herbert’s lines. The speaker of the poem, addressing his own heart, admonishes:

> Recover all thy sigh-blown age<br>
On double pleasures: leave thy cold dispute<br>
Of what is fit, and not forsake thy cage,<br>
Thy rope of sands,<br>
Which pettie thoughts have made, and made to thee<br>
Good cable, to enforce and draw,<br>
And by thy law,<br>
While thou didst wink and wouldst not see.

(I note that a modern rendering of the line “And by thy law” reads “And be thy law.”) In these lines, we see that much like the narrator of “The Book of Sand,” the speaker of the poem is bound by chains of his own making. It is the speaker’s “pettie thoughts” which make “Good cable, to enforce & draw” rather than some extrapersonal force. As the rest of the poem attests, the speaker feels himself caged by his faith in God—God being to the mind the quintessence of the infinite & eternal in Being. The speaker’s thought-forged cable, his “rope of sands,” thus binds him to God much as the narrator’s fascination with the book lashes his thoughts—even his dreams—to its infinite pages. Both may loose their restraints at will, & yet seem powerless to do so.

But as the true nature of the Book of Sand becomes apparent to the narrator, his captivation gives way to dread. He explains:

> Summer was drawing to a close, & I realized that the book was monstrous. It was cold consolation to think that I, who looked upon it with my eyes & fondled it with my ten flesh-&-bone fingers, was no less monstrous than the book. I felt it was a nightmare thing, an obscene thing, & that it defiled & corrupted reality.

The book’s capacity to defile & corrupt seems to stem from an irresolvable paradox. It is a finite object which the narrator can hold in his hands, & yet it contains an infinite number of pages; it is bounded front & back by a cover, & yet it is boundless. I am not sure that Borges intended the analogy, but his mention of the narrator’s being “no less monstrous” in his corporeality likens the finite extent of the book to the body, its infinite contents to the soul. If the pages of the book are indeed an image of the soul, it is a bleak one—this soul is infinite, but its infinity only bewilders & confounds. Its expressions, like the numbers of the pages, are momentary flashes, never to be repeated. There is no means of revisiting a page once glimpsed, *no possibility* of orienting oneself within one’s innermost being.

Whether they are a reflection of the soul or of space & time, the disorienting & apparently random numbering of the pages is perhaps the chief horror of the Book of Sand. As the stranger has it:

> “[…] I don’t know why they’re numbered in this arbitrary way, but perhaps it’s to give one to understand that the terms of an infinite series can be numbered any way whatever.”<br><br>
[…]<br><br>
“If space is infinite, we are anywhere, at any point in space. If time
is infinite, we are at any point in time.”

Again, it is not only that the narrator is adrift on an endless sea of text, but that there is *no possibility* of reaching shore. Even the most distinctive landmarks—the illustrations spaced, as the narrator discovers, “at two-thousand page intervals”—are entirely useless. He can view them only once, & the orderless ordering of the pages will never point the way back. He is anywhere among the pages, & the drawing of the anchor is truly no anchor at all; it will not hold his place. There must be some chance, we may think, of the narrator’s stumbling once more upon a familiar page. But a bit of probability theory proves that no matter how great a (finite) number of pages are viewed, the odds of finding any of them again necessarily approach zero.<sup id="four-origin"><a href="#four">4</a></sup> Whatever hope or curiosity inspired the narrator to purchase so dearly the infinite book, it now is thoroughly dashed—his restless examination has shown its perplexities to be impenetrable.

For the reader, this moment is a kind of double-revelation: not only the horrors of the book are brought to light, but also the hidden ironies of the story. Foremost among these are the peculiarities of the stranger’s actions & appearance. It is clear that whatever lack characterized his financial affairs, the stranger did not knock on the door with pure intentions—his “honest poverty” no longer seems so honest.<sup id="five-origin"><a href="#five">5</a></sup> We may have been fooled with the narrator into believing that the man’s plain aspect & “air of melancholy” resulted from misfortunes of business or of birth, but it is now clear that the infinite book was to blame for much of the weight he carried. There is further irony in the two characters’ dramatic reversals of fortune. In the trade for the Book of Sand, the narrator has acquired his visitor’s poverty & melancholy; the stranger, his host’s former wealth & a long-awaited freedom from the book. The narrator’s early description of his visitor thus becomes a portrait of himself.

Additional ironies may be lurking in “The Book of Sand,” though they are of a more dubious sort. However, since the narrator describes the story as a “fantastic tale,” it may be permissible to indulge in some cautious speculation. In the afterword to the collection, Borges says concerning the story “The Congress,” “[…] I have interwoven, as is my wont, certain autobiographical features.” In “The Book of Sand,” evidence for a similar art can be found in the narrator’s “nearsightedness.” Borges’ own vision began to degenerate sometime in his thirties, & by the time this story was written (or dictated), he was nearly or completely blind. The narrator’s nearsightedness is also ironic if interpreted to mean shortsightedness or heedlessness, given his lack of caution in acquiring the Book of Sand. This reading may not be supported by the original Spanish “miopía,” but if the word does not carry the suggestive connotations of the English “nearsightedness,” it does, at the very least, convey a lack of vision. That is to say, in addition to its being an “autobiographical feature,” the narrator’s nearsightedness may be meant to foretell his inability to see the true nature of the book & the troubles it will bring him.

There is also a certain bibliographic irony in the story, made apparent by the narrator’s placement of the Book of Sand on his shelves. He states, “I thought of putting the Book of Sand in the space left by the Wyclif, but I chose at last to hide it behind some imperfect volumes of the *Thousand & One Nights*.” These words may tell us that the narrator feels the Book of Sand to be out of place in the Wyclif’s former home, & that it may have a closer kinship to the *Thousand & One Nights*. The irony of the first point is now clear: the narrator hoped to acquire a “sacred book” of immense value, but in fact exchanged his own sacred book—whose pages were finite—for one which is monstrous & infinite. His intuition was correct then, in rejecting the space left by the Wyclif as a home for the Book of Sand.

But what of his decision to hide the Book of Sand behind the *Thousand & One Nights*? Does this suggest a connection between the two texts? Since the story gives us little more of the *Nights* than a title, we should begin our investigation there. In a series of lectures delivered at Harvard in 1967-68, Borges notes that a literal translation of the Arabic title *Quitab alif laila wa laila* is given by Captain Richard Francis Burton as *The Book of a Thousand Nights & a Night*. Borges explains that “[…] ‘the thousand nights’ means to the imagination, ‘the many nights,’ even as ‘forty’ used to mean ‘many’ in the seventeenth century.” Hence the title may be paraphrased (with some license) as *The Many Nights & a Night*. This alternate title has what Borges refers to as a “magic precision”: its dual-invocation of the indefinite *Many Nights* alongside the concrete *& a Night* appeals more strongly to the imagination than simply *The Many Nights*. The nights are many, yes, but they are also precisely numbered; the *Thousand & One Nights* are a series which seems to go on & on… Is this not an approximation of the Book of Sand? If not Herbert’s poem, then perhaps Borges first imagined the Book of Sand while reading in the *Thousand & One Nights*. Indeed, it may be that the volumes of the *Nights* are a kind of double of the infinite book—the potential Doppelgänger we were alerted to by the narrator’s mention of Stevenson. If so, the narrator, seeming to hide the book arbitrarily, has in fact concealed it behind its twin. There are likely deeper connections between the Book of Sand & the *Thousand & One Nights*, but I confess I am largely ignorant of the tales of Scheherazade, & that my library—which occupies but a few shelves in my apartment—does not contain the many volumes of Burton’s translation.

With the story’s ironies revealed & the nature of the “impossible book” uncovered, both reader & narrator may perhaps have gained some prudence. The latter, horrified & sleepless, is unburdened of all illusion surrounding the book & determines to rid himself of the “nightmare thing.” He begins to formulate a plan:

> I considered fire, but I feared that the burning of an infinite book might be similarly infinite, & suffocate the planet in smoke.<br><br>
I remembered reading once that the best place to hide a leaf was in the forest.

With this in mind the narrator, a retired librarian, steals into a remote corner of the National Library & deposits the Book of Sand in “the shadows of the basement, where the maps & periodicals are kept.” He hides it “on one of the library’s damp shelves,” trying “not to notice how high up, or how far from the door.” There is something of a literary trope in the narrator’s turning away to shield himself from the knowledge of the book’s location. His actions recall a pair of Old Testament tales, one from Genesis, the other from Exodus. Genesis XIX tells the story of the family of Lot, who were ordered by angels to flee the Lord’s destruction of Sodom. When Lot’s wife looks back on the city—whether because she disobeyed the angels or because she glimpsed the Lord as he descended—“she became a pillar of salt.” In Exodus Chapters III & XXXIII, Moses hides his face from the sight of the Lord, who tells him, “Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me, & live.” There is also an episode in *The Odyssey* of Homer, wherein the sea-goddess Ino, called Leucothea meaning “white goddess,” lends the shipwrecked Odysseus a veil which will aid his swim to shore. She speaks to him, saying:

> And here, take this veil, it is immortal, & fasten it under<br>
your chest; & there is no need for you to die, nor to suffer.<br>
But when with both hands you have taken hold of the mainland,<br>
untie the veil & throw it out in the wine-blue water<br>
far from the land; & turn your face away as you do so.<sup id="six-origin"><a href="#six">6</a></sup>

In each of these instances, mortal persons are instructed to turn their eyes away from immortal beings or objects. Perhaps this is because they are too much for a mortal to bear, or because to look upon something, to encompass it in one’s gaze, is to make of it an object which then can be desired. The temptation to look back, then, is the Siren song of idolatry, the desire to objectify the immortal or the limitless so as to hold it in one’s grasp. But as we have seen, it is impossible to grasp the infinite—that way lies madness, insomnia, the corruption of reality.

Aware of these dangers, the narrator wisely rejects temptation by seeking not to know the resting place of the infinite book. Through his willful ignorance, he is partially—though not entirely—freed from the evils of the book. In the closing words of the story, he says, “I now feel a little better, but I refuse even to walk down the street the library’s on.” In his notes to the *Collected Fictions*, Andrew Hurley explains that “the street the library’s on” refers to “Calle México, the site of the National Library, where Borges was director.” This final autobiographical feature also serves as a buffer between the narrator & the Book of Sand’s temptations. Aware of the obscenity of the book but mistrustful of his will, he has placed an entire street between himself & the library’s “damp shelves.” Should he happen to glance over his shoulder, he may be safely assured that he will not be turned to a pillar of salt. He appears, then, to have learned his lesson, though he is marked by his encounter with the infinite.

In turning his eyes & his feet from the Book of Sand, the narrator has turned away from the infinite & towards the finite, away from the limitless pages & toward his “ten flesh-&-bone fingers.” Neither his initial Humean skepticism nor his obsessive enthusiasm for the book persist; instead, melancholy & caution—we may perhaps say wisdom—guide his steps. His turning away may be viewed as a surrender (& certainly he bears the scars of a psychological defeat), but it may also be seen as an embrace of life’s finitude. The Book of Sand is then a kind of *memento mori*, a reminder that after all, our days this side of the vale are not without end. To this fact the narrator—having seen what the endless entails, & having been subjected to irony & artifice at the hands of both the stranger & Borges himself—may reply, “Thank God.”

We mortal readers of the narrator’s tale should take care not to repeat the narrator’s mistakes. We are admittedly unlikely to encounter the infinite in the form of a book, but certain ideas or movements of the soul may give the feeling of its overwhelming imminence. As the “<i>more geometrico</i>” which opens the story relates, the idea of the infinite is enfolded in even the simplest objects—the line, the plane, the volume, … Reality, it seems, is teeming with infinity. But for all its abundance, we should not suppose we can hold the infinite in our hands or in our minds; it is hubris to think we may close it in a conception. The narrator’s experience demonstrates that to attempt to do so is to spend one’s days obsessively counting every grain of sand on the earth—we may count as many as will fill the hourglass of our days, but no more. We should rather leave off counting altogether & be glad of that gift allotted to us which the infinite, by definition, lacks—namely ending, *finis*.

<sup id="one"><a href="#one-origin">1</a></sup> Italics are used to refer to the collection, & quotation marks to refer to the story.

<sup id="two"><a href="#two-origin">2</a></sup> Andrew Hurley’s translation is used throughout.

<sup id="three"><a href="#three-origin">3</a></sup> My translation.

<sup id="four"><a href="#four-origin">4</a></sup> For a demonstration of this fact, see <a target="_blank" href="https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/perceptua-b6ea3.appspot.com/o/public%2FPage%20of%20No%20Return.pdf?alt=media&token=2daac485-6156-4caf-8898-31b543df675f">“Page of No Return: Problems & Probabilities in Borges’ Book of Sand.”</a>

<sup id="five"><a href="#five-origin">5</a></sup> The original Spanish reads “pobreza decente.” For “decente,” Wiktionary lists the following definitions: 1. decent (showing integrity & moral uprightness); 2. clean, tidy; 3. decent (good enough, okay). Thus Hurley’s translation “honest” captures the irony well.

<sup id="six"><a href="#six-origin">6</a></sup> Richmond Lattimore’s translation.
